I"Ô<p>This is short read about my first attempt to trek to Sandakphu. This is meant to be read after my first post about my <a href="/2020/04/03/Sandakphu/">second attempt</a>. Confusing, I know.</p>

<h2 id="prologue">Prologue</h2>

<p>It was a hot, humid, and horrible summer day in IIT Kharagpur - where I  was doing my summer internship in, when Karan, Sanaa, Hradini (my  friends from college) and I finally agreed on the plan to trek to  Sandakphu in October. We chose Sandakphu with IndiaHikes since it was  the closest to our college and was rated to be of moderate difficulty.  Since this was to be the first time we were trekking, the fact that the  trail was well established and had a road next to it the entire way up  to the summit was a plus just in case something went wrong up in the  mountains (definitely <em>no</em> foreshadowing here). IndiaHikes had a  fitness requirement of being able to complete a 5K in 40 minutes to join the trek. Sanaa and Hradini had to push hard to meet this goal, but all was well when it was time to board our train to NJP on the 5th of  October, 2019. I decided not to take my camera since both Karan and  Hradini were carrying theirs. We reached NJP after a 20 hour long train  ride just in time to catch the cab that the company had arranged from  NJP to leave for Jaubhari.</p>

<p>We met Akshay, who was to be our trek  leader, and the rest of our trekmates once we made it to Jaubhari. After the trek briefing, he handed out our health cards while he took our  oxygen saturation readings and delegated the job of checking our blood  pressure levels to Shiva, one of our trekmates who was a doctor by  profession. I wandered off to explore the village after I was done with my checkup and found a small football field near our homestay. I sat  there for a while, enjoying the absence of company, and returned back to my room to repack my bag. After a hearty dinner, we hit the bed after  what had been a tiring day full of travel.</p>

<p>We woke up to a  foggy morning the next day. Around 30 minutes into the trek to Tumling,  the fog became extremely dense and did not clear for the rest of the  day. On our way to Lamyadhura, a few of us lost our way and had to walk  an extra kilometer through leech infested slush before we rejoined the  others. I had only a solitary leech to get rid off while Sanaa had to  pull out a dozen of them sucking on her leg. Everyone was fending off  phantom leeches for the rest of the day. I was completely spent by the  time I got to Meghma - I was hungry and the damp, depressing weather had sapped me off most of my energy. I trudged my way to Tumling after  lunch through the unrelenting fog. After the health checkup and dinner, I was more than relieved to tuck into my bed for the night.</p>

<p>I was tired when I woke up the following morning. Both the weather and the  clothes that we put out to dry the previous remained damp. After  breakfast, we started our day‚Äôs trek to Kalipokhri. I trekked alongside  Shiva and his brother for most of the day and struck up a conversation  about running with Shiva. It was only when he described how he trained  for his half marathons did I realize that the way I had approached  running till then was completely wrong. I had had no concept of easy  runs - everyday I ran was a PB attempt. In retrospect, I was incredibly  lucky to not get terribly injured. I felt much better when we got to  Kalipokhri than I did after the previous day of trekking. We went into  our tea house to keep our bags in our rooms and came back outside to  stretch. After ten minutes of stretching, which included us standing in a circle and massaging the shoulders of the person who was in the front  of us, we headed back to our rooms to get freshen up and get our  utensils for chai and snacks. After washing my face, I decided to lie  down on my bed for a few minutes since I had some time to kill before  everyone else got ready.</p>

<p>I‚Äôm not entirely sure when I realized  that something was wrong with my body. In the span of thirty seconds, I  went from feeling fine to freezing. My chest felt weird. I walked  outside to find Akshay and asked him to check my oxygen saturation. At  10,000ft, the altitude we were at, the ‚Äúnormal‚Äù SpO2 percentage is 90.  Mine was about half that. He then checked my pulse and blood pressure -  both were normal. He listened to my lungs with a stethoscope to check  for signs of HAPE. They too seemed fine. He gave me an entire tablet of  diamox and told me to put on a couple of more layers of clothing while  he got me some chai. When he came back, he checked my SpO2 reading  again. No improvement. It was 5 in the evening and we had to make a  decision - If I was to descend, I had to leave as soon as possible. If I were to stay and my body did not adapt, I had to be hooked up to an  oxygen cylinder for the night. Things could get very ugly very quickly  if the oxygen cylinder ran out in the middle of the night. We agreed  that I would descend to base camp and he went out to find a cab to ferry me down. I was packing my bag when Sanaa, Hradini and Karan came into  the room telling me that they would come down with me. I refused. I did not think that it was fair on them to have to stop the trek midway for me. Since I did not have enough cash in hand to pay the cab, Akshay  and Hradini collected the money from everyone else. Everyone came out to wish me well and Akshay checked my blood saturation at the door - just  in case. Unfortunately, oxygen saturation in your blood does not  increase because of hope. He told me that I was always welcome to trek  to Sandakphu again with IndiaHikes and that I did not have to pay for  it. I promised him that I‚Äôd come back to complete the trek and got into  the Sumo.</p>

<p>The ride back was a nightmare. Going down a mountain  in pitch darkness with a driver who stopped in the middle for a couple  of swigs of alcohol while I was shivering after wearing 5 layers had me  fearing for my life for the first time. After a couple of hours of  driving too fast, we finally made it to Manebhanjan. I stayed the night  at a homestay there thankful to be done with what I can only describe as a harrowing day. I felt much better the next morning after a good night of sleep. It was evident from my struggle to make it to the top of a  nearby monastery in search of network coverage that my lungs were still  not back to normal. I did not get signal from up there but caught a  glimpse of the Sleeping Buddha from up there. Akshay had called the  previous night to tell me to go back to basecamp to get my vitals  checked again. I walked to Jaubhari and got my blood pressure and oxygen saturation checked by Isha, another of IndiaHikes‚Äô trek leaders. My  SpO2 levels were back to being ‚Äúacceptable‚Äù. After a couple of phone  calls: to my parents so that they could book a train ticket back to  college, to Akshay so that he knew I was feeling better, and to a  college friend who lived in NJP to tell him that I‚Äôd like to crash in  his house for a bit, I grabbed my bag and caught a cab to get back to  civilization.</p>
:ET